# Space Exploration Day

Space Exploration Day is celebrated on July 20 th . On this important day in 1969, America’s Apollo 11 mission safely landed astronauts Neil Armstrong and Edwin “Buzz” Aldrin on the moon’s surface. Today space venture has become the norm with multiple private projects of individuals preparing for open space endeavors.

The National Aeronautical Space Administration (NASA) remains the lead force not only in space exploration but also in developing products derived from the scientific endeavors necessary to support the increasingly challenging missions NASA performs as it seeks to reach new heights in space exploration.

The Government Publishing Office online bookstore offers a collection of publications featuring the exploits and wonders of the NASA program from its earliest days until today. At the online bookstore find publications from books with spectacular photography from above planet earth featuring phytoplankton blooms in the Western North Atlantic Ocean to commercial products developed from NASA’s technological efforts highlighting dozens of technologies such as self-guided cars, patient care and more. It’s all at https://bookstore.gpo.gov/catalog/aerospace-astronomy-space-exploration .

The GPO Online Bookstore – Easy Access to Federal Publications

HOW DO I OBTAIN THESE RESOURCES?

Sign up to receive promotional bulletin emails from the US Government Online Bookstore.

Shop Online Anytime: You can buy a vast majority of eBooks or print publications —with FREE Standard Shipping worldwide— from the U.S. Government Online Bookstore at https://bookstore.gpo.gov.

Click here to browse our Aerospace, Astronomy & Space Exploration collection

Order by Phone or Email: Call our Customer Contact Center Monday through Friday, 8 am to 4:30 pm Eastern (except US Federal holidays). From US and Canada, call toll-free 1.866.512.1800. DC or International customers call +1.202.512.1800.  Email orders to ContactCenter@gpo.gov

Visit a Federal depository library: Search for U.S. Government publications in a nearby Federal depository library. You can find the records for most titles in GPO’s Catalog of U.S. Government Publications.

Find more than a million official Federal Government publications from all three branches at www.govinfo.gov .

About the author : Blogger contributor Ed Kessler is a Promotions Specialist in GPO’s Publication and Information Sales program office.

SHARE THIS:

Share

Print (Opens in new window) Print

Share on Reddit (Opens in new window) Reddit

Share on Pinterest (Opens in new window) Pinterest

Email a link to a friend (Opens in new window) Email

Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook

Share on X (Opens in new window) X

Share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window) LinkedIn

Share on Tumblr (Opens in new window) Tumblr

Related

This entry was posted  on Tuesday, July 20th, 2021 at 9:48 am and is filed under NASA , Science & Technology , Technology .					You can follow any responses to this entry through the RSS 2.0 feed.
											You can leave a response , or trackback from your own site.

Post navigation
