# TARDEC: America’s Tank Center’s Evolving Story

The U.S. Tank Automotive Research, Development and Engineering Center (TARDEC) was established in 1946. During the early years, engineering emphasis was on new technologies to improve military ground vehicles. The result was the highly successful U.S. Army M1 Abrams tank. The global competition from America’s adversaries was fierce in the latest ground warfare technologies, particularly from Russia, which has been a leader in the advancement of the tank as a ground force, making the mission of TARDEC a priority.

This reprint of TARDEC Story: Sixty-five Years of Innovation, 1946-2010 is a comprehensive history of the many innovations in tanks and other military ground vehicles and equipment developed by the engineers at TARDEC. It is full of illuminating illustrations and photographs to that depict the advanced building techniques as well as the formidable machines that roll out of the assembly lines. Those within the military, military history buffs, and military enthusiasts will enjoy this graphical history. For the technically minded and/or military savvy, here’s a publication both historical and appealing in its insights and graphic depiction of new ground warfare technology in action.

Learn about more about America’s military history by visiting our Department of Defense collection here . Also, check out our abundance of military magazines & journals .

The GPO Online Bookstore – Easy Access to Federal Publications

HOW DO I OBTAIN THIS RESOURCE?

Sign up to receive promotional bulletin emails from the US Government Online Bookstore.

Shop Online Anytime: You can buy a vast majority of eBooks or print publications —with FREE Standard Shipping worldwide— from the U.S. Government Online Bookstore at https://bookstore.gpo.gov.

Click here to purchase TARDEC Story: Sixty-five Years Of Innovation, 1946-2010

Click here to browse our United States Army History collection

Click here to browse our Armed Forces & Military Branches History collection

Order by Phone or Email: Call our Customer Contact Center Monday through Friday, 8 am to 4:30 pm Eastern (except US Federal holidays). From US and Canada, call toll-free 1.866.512.1800. DC or International customers call +1.202.512.1800.  Email orders to ContactCenter@gpo.gov

Visit a Federal depository library: Search for U.S. Government publications in a nearby Federal depository library. You can find the records for most titles in GPO’s Catalog of U.S. Government Publications.

Find more than a million official Federal Government publications from all three branches at www.govinfo.gov .

About the author : Blogger contributor Ed Kessler is a Promotions Specialist in GPO’s Publication and Information Sales program office.

SHARE THIS:

Share

Print (Opens in new window) Print

Share on Reddit (Opens in new window) Reddit

Share on Pinterest (Opens in new window) Pinterest

Email a link to a friend (Opens in new window) Email

Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook

Share on X (Opens in new window) X

Share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window) LinkedIn

Share on Tumblr (Opens in new window) Tumblr

Related

This entry was posted  on Friday, May 28th, 2021 at 12:59 pm and is filed under Department of Defense , Military History , U.S. Army .					You can follow any responses to this entry through the RSS 2.0 feed.
											You can leave a response , or trackback from your own site.

Post navigation
