# Discovering a Source of Laughter in the Brain

Posted on February 12th, 2019 by Dr. Francis Collins

If laughter really is the best medicine, wouldn’t it be great if we could learn more about what goes on in the brain when we laugh? Neuroscientists recently made some major progress on this front by pinpointing a part of the brain that, when stimulated, never fails to induce smiles and laughter.

In their study conducted in three patients undergoing electrical stimulation brain mapping as part of epilepsy treatment, the NIH-funded team found that stimulation of a specific tract of neural fibers, called the cingulum bundle, triggered laughter, smiles, and a sense of calm. Not only do the findings shed new light on the biology of laughter, researchers hope they may also lead to new strategies for treating a range of conditions, including anxiety, depression, and chronic pain.

In people with epilepsy whose seizures are poorly controlled with medication, surgery to remove seizure-inducing brain tissue sometimes helps. People awaiting such surgeries must first undergo a procedure known as intracranial electroencephalography (iEEG). This involves temporarily placing 10 to 20 arrays of tiny electrodes in the brain for up to several weeks, in order to pinpoint the source of a patient’s seizures in the brain. With the patient’s permission, those electrodes can also enable physician-researchers to stimulate various regions of the patient’s brain to map their functions and make potentially new and unexpected discoveries.

In the new study, published in The Journal of Clinical Investigation , Jon T. Willie, Kelly Bijanki, and their colleagues at Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, looked at a 23-year-old undergoing iEEG for 8 weeks in preparation for surgery to treat her uncontrolled epilepsy [1]. One of the electrodes implanted in her brain was located within the cingulum bundle and, when that area was stimulated for research purposes, the woman experienced an uncontrollable urge to laugh. Not only was the woman given to smiles and giggles, she also reported feeling relaxed and calm.

As a further and more objective test of her mood, the researchers asked the woman to interpret the expression of faces on a computer screen as happy, sad, or neutral. Electrical stimulation to the cingulum bundle led her to see those faces as happier, a sign of a generally more positive mood. A full evaluation of her mental state also showed she was fully aware and alert.

To confirm the findings, the researchers looked to two other patients, a 40-year-old man and a 28-year-old woman, both undergoing iEEG in the course of epilepsy treatment. In those two volunteers, stimulation of the cingulum bundle also triggered laughter and reduced anxiety with otherwise normal cognition.

Willie notes that the cingulum bundle links many brain areas together. He likens it to a super highway with lots of on and off ramps. He suspects the spot they’ve uncovered lies at a key intersection, providing access to various brain networks regulating mood, emotion, and social interaction.

Previous research has shown that stimulation of other parts of the brain can also prompt patients to laugh. However, what makes stimulation of the cingulum bundle a particularly promising approach is that it not only triggers laughter, but also reduces anxiety.

The new findings suggest that stimulation of the cingulum bundle may be useful for calming patients’ anxieties during neurosurgeries in which they must remain awake. In fact, Willie’s team did so during their 23-year-old woman’s subsequent epilepsy surgery. Each time she became distressed, the stimulation provided immediate relief. Also, if traditional deep brain stimulation or less invasive means of brain stimulation can be developed and found to be safe for long-term use, they may offer new ways to treat depression, anxiety disorders, and/or chronic pain.

Meanwhile, Willie’s team is hard at work using similar approaches to map brain areas involved in other aspects of mood, including fear, sadness, and anxiety. Together with the multidisciplinary work being mounted by the NIH-led BRAIN Initiative , these kinds of studies promise to reveal functionalities of the human brain that have previously been out of reach, with profound consequences for neuroscience and human medicine.

Reference :

[1] Cingulum stimulation enhances positive affect and anxiolysis to facilitate awake craniotomy . Bijanki KR, Manns JR, Inman CS, Choi KS, Harati S, Pedersen NP, Drane DL, Waters AC, Fasano RE, Mayberg HS, Willie JT. J Clin Invest. 2018 Dec 27.

Links :

Video: Patient’s Response (Bijanki et al. The Journal of Clinical Investigation)

Epilepsy Information Page (National Institute of Neurological Disease and Stroke/NIH)

Jon T. Willie (Emory University, Atlanta, GA)

NIH Support: National Institute of Neurological Disease and Stroke; National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences

Share this:

Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)

More

Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Pinterest (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Tumblr (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)

Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Skype (Opens in new window)

Click to print (Opens in new window)

Related

Posted In: News

Tags: anxiety , awake neurosurgery , brain , BRAIN Initiative , brain mapping surgery , brain surgery , calm , Chronic Pain , cingulum bundle , depression , epilepsy , iEEG , intracranial electroencephalography , laughter , neurosurgery , pain , seizures , smiles

Richard Allen Pearlson says: February 12, 2019 at 3:22 pm Thank you for sharing information of great value, to all of us. Reply

Thank you for sharing information of great value, to all of us.

MARK RUSSELL says: February 12, 2019 at 3:33 pm Psychology became a Science in 1946 at the Bolder Conference.  Most of us are currently functioning with Mega Stress and there are very few answers.  For some the answer is Relaxation Techniques and for others it’s Prayer three times per day.  I like what this article said, “NIH-funded team found that stimulation of a specific tract of neural fibers, called the cingulum bundle, triggered laughter, smiles, and a sense of calm.”  If the “Sense of Calm” constitutes only a 20% interrupt in ones Stress, this could be considered a miracle.  Most people lead a very normal life, until they get hit with 10-20% more Stress.  For a Bi-Polar this might create a miracle in their “Depressive Stress Cycles”.  I wonder what would happen with Vets with PTSD and others with Attention Deficit Disorder? … Reply Carrie says: February 15, 2019 at 11:09 am Yes, and maybe it can prevent suicides.  I don’t care how happiness and contentment are achieved as long as people can still be healthy, productive and not harmful to others. Reply Mark Russell says: April 5, 2021 at 5:17 pm Jokes, Cartoons, Funny Sitcoms, Joke Book, Funny Movies, Humour around dinner table, Humour in life, and Laughter at Work. Reply

Psychology became a Science in 1946 at the Bolder Conference.  Most of us are currently functioning with Mega Stress and there are very few answers.  For some the answer is Relaxation Techniques and for others it’s Prayer three times per day.  I like what this article said, “NIH-funded team found that stimulation of a specific tract of neural fibers, called the cingulum bundle, triggered laughter, smiles, and a sense of calm.”  If the “Sense of Calm” constitutes only a 20% interrupt in ones Stress, this could be considered a miracle.  Most people lead a very normal life, until they get hit with 10-20% more Stress.  For a Bi-Polar this might create a miracle in their “Depressive Stress Cycles”.  I wonder what would happen with Vets with PTSD and others with Attention Deficit Disorder? …

Carrie says: February 15, 2019 at 11:09 am Yes, and maybe it can prevent suicides.  I don’t care how happiness and contentment are achieved as long as people can still be healthy, productive and not harmful to others. Reply

Yes, and maybe it can prevent suicides.  I don’t care how happiness and contentment are achieved as long as people can still be healthy, productive and not harmful to others.

Mark Russell says: April 5, 2021 at 5:17 pm Jokes, Cartoons, Funny Sitcoms, Joke Book, Funny Movies, Humour around dinner table, Humour in life, and Laughter at Work. Reply

Jokes, Cartoons, Funny Sitcoms, Joke Book, Funny Movies, Humour around dinner table, Humour in life, and Laughter at Work.

C.I. says: February 12, 2019 at 11:10 pm Laughter is the best medicine. Reply

Laughter is the best medicine.

DrPhilip Siegel MD says: February 13, 2019 at 6:51 pm – interesting and brings to question physiological foundation…is it possibly exhaustion of chemical neurotransmitter…have seen same result with anterior cingulotomy for depression and anxiety associated with chronic pain…the brain a complex which I believe explained my cerebellar stimulation with pathway to limbic system affecting nociception in monkeys… Reply

– interesting and brings to question physiological foundation…is it possibly exhaustion of chemical neurotransmitter…have seen same result with anterior cingulotomy for depression and anxiety associated with chronic pain…the brain a complex which I believe explained my cerebellar stimulation with pathway to limbic system affecting nociception in monkeys…

P.T. says: February 13, 2019 at 8:58 pm Yes, it means that laughter is important for our health. How about the one who never had a laughter for whole day, but he looks healthy. Reply

Yes, it means that laughter is important for our health. How about the one who never had a laughter for whole day, but he looks healthy.

samy says: August 27, 2019 at 6:00 am I would like to count with your help as a patient with chronic pains,sever depression anxiety, sever sleep disorder etc. Reply

I would like to count with your help as a patient with chronic pains,sever depression anxiety, sever sleep disorder etc.

Leave a Comment Cancel reply

Recent Items

How One Change to The Coronavirus Spike Influences Infectivity January 18, 2022

Biomedical Research Leads Science’s 2021 Breakthroughs January 4, 2022

Celebrating NIH Science, Blogs, and Blog Readers! December 19, 2021

Capturing the Extracellular Matrix in 3D Color December 16, 2021

Latest on Omicron Variant and COVID-19 Vaccine Protection December 14, 2021

Blog Archives
