# Vietnam War History

The Vietnam War ended in 1975, yet to this day it is one of the most well-documented wars in American history. Many Americans may not realize the U.S. military had been engaged in Vietnam since World War II. The United States advised the South Vietnamese military and the French colonist occupiers during the immediate postwar years. It also developed an advisory program after the Geneva Agreements of 1954.

The Government Publishing Office (GPO) online bookstore covers every phase of America’s involvement in Vietnam, including sources showing how the U.S. intelligence community viewed critical developments over a 27-year period, ranging from analysis of the implications of the post-World War II breakup of colonial empires to the Communist takeover of Saigon in 1975.

The extensive coverage of the Vietnam War by every branch of the U.S. military is a testament to the importance the Pentagon placed on Vietnam War decisions made by past presidents and their respective administrations from World War II to the end of the war in 1975.

To gain a better understanding of the history of the Vietnam War, browse GPO’s Vietnam War collection here to find a title that matches the period you might be most interested in reading.

The GPO Online Bookstore – Easy Access to Federal Publications

HOW DO I OBTAIN THESE RESOURCES?

Sign up to receive promotional bulletin emails from the US Government Online Bookstore.

Shop Online Anytime: You can buy a vast majority of eBooks or print publications —with FREE Standard Shipping worldwide— from the U.S. Government Online Bookstore at https://bookstore.gpo.gov.

Click here to browse our Vietnam War collection

Click here to browse ours Wars and Conflicts collection

Order by Phone or Email: Call our Customer Contact Center Monday through Friday, 8 am to 4:30 pm Eastern (except US Federal holidays). From US and Canada, call toll-free 1.866.512.1800. DC or International customers call +1.202.512.1800.  Email orders to ContactCenter@gpo.gov

Visit a Federal depository library: Search for U.S. Government publications in a nearby Federal depository library. You can find the records for most titles in GPO’s Catalog of U.S. Government Publications.

Find more than a million official Federal Government publications from all three branches at www.govinfo.gov .

About the author : Blogger contributor Ed Kessler is a Promotions Specialist in GPO’s Publication and Information Sales program office.

SHARE THIS:

Share

Print (Opens in new window) Print

Share on Reddit (Opens in new window) Reddit

Share on Pinterest (Opens in new window) Pinterest

Email a link to a friend (Opens in new window) Email

Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook

Share on X (Opens in new window) X

Share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window) LinkedIn

Share on Tumblr (Opens in new window) Tumblr

Related

This entry was posted  on Friday, March 26th, 2021 at 2:53 pm and is filed under Center of Military History , Department of Defense , Vietnam , World History .					You can follow any responses to this entry through the RSS 2.0 feed.
											You can leave a response , or trackback from your own site.

Post navigation
