Both sourcing and executing the script will run the commands in the script line by line, as if you typed those commands by hand line by line.

The differences are:

 * When you *source* the script you are typing the commands in your *current* shell. Any changes to the environment will take effect and stay in your current shell.
 * When you *execute* the script you are opening a *new* shell, type the commands in the new shell, copy the output back to your current shell, then close the new shell. Any changes to environment will take effect only in the new shell and will be lost once the shell is closed.

The “environment” are things like the current working directory and environment variables. Also shell settings (among others history and completion features). There are more, but those are the most visible.

Changes to the filesystem will stay in the filesystem regardless of source or execute.

Use source if you want the script to change the environment in your currently running shell. Use execute otherwise.

If you want more details please read on.

Terminology
-----------

To clarify some common confusion about the syntax to execute and the syntax to source.

Syntax to execute:

    ./myscript

This will **execute** `myscript` provided that the file is executable and located in the current directory. The leading dot and slash (`./`) denotes the current directory. This is necessary because the current directory is usually not (and usually should not be) in `$PATH`.

    myscript

This will **execute** `myscript` provided that the file is executable and located in some directory in `$PATH`.

Syntax to source:

    source myscript

This will **source** `myscript`. The file does not need to be executable but it must be a valid shell script. The file can be in the current directory or in a directory in `$PATH`.

    . myscript

This will also **source** `myscript`. This “spelling” is the official one as defined by [POSIX](http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/utilities/V3_chap02.html#dot). Bash defined `source` as an alias to the dot.

And for completeness:

    exec myscript

This will terminate the current shell and then execute myscript in place of the terminated shell. That means when myscript is done there no shell to return to. `exec` is powerful but rarely needed.

I put some links at the end for more information on these topics.

Demonstration
-------------

Consider `myscript.sh` with following content:

    #!/bin/sh
    # demonstrate setting a variable
    echo &quot;foo: &quot;$(env | grep FOO)
    export FOO=foo
    echo &quot;foo: &quot;$(env | grep FOO)
    # demonstrate changing of working directory
    echo &quot;PWD: &quot;$PWD
    cd somedir
    echo &quot;PWD: &quot;$PWD

Before we execute the script first we check the current environment:

    $ env | grep FOO
    $ echo $PWD
    /home/lesmana

The variable `FOO` is not defined and we are in the home directory.

Now we **execute** the file:

    $ ./myscript.sh
    foo:
    foo: FOO=foo
    PWD: /home/lesmana
    PWD: /home/lesmana/somedir

Check the environment again:

    $ env | grep FOO
    $ echo $PWD
    /home/lesmana

The variable `FOO` is not set, and the working directory did not change.

The script output clearly shows that the variable was set, and the directory was changed. The check afterwards shows that the variable is not set and the directory not changed. What happened? The changes were made in a *new* shell.

The kernel spawned *new* shell to run the script. The input and output of the new shell is connected to the current shell. But other than that it is an own separate shell. The script is running in the new shell, and all changes to the environment take effect in the new shell. After the script is done, the shell is destroyed. All changes to the environment in the new shell are destroyed with it. Only the output was printed in the current shell.

Now we **source** the file:

    $ source myscript.sh
    foo:
    foo: FOO=foo
    PWD: /home/lesmana
    PWD: /home/lesmana/somedir

Check the environment again:

    $ env | grep FOO
    FOO=foo
    $ echo $PWD
    /home/lesmana/somedir

The variable FOO is set, and the working directory has changed.

Sourcing the script does not create a new shell. All commands are run in the current shell and changes to the environment take effect in the current shell.

Note that in this simple example the output of executing is the same as sourcing the script. This is not necessarily always the case.

Also note that changes to filesystem (`cp`, `mv`, `rm`, `mkdir`) will stay in the filesystem regardless of source or execute.

Another Demonstration
---------------------

Consider following script `pid.sh`:

    #!/bin/sh
    echo $$

The special variable `$$` expands to the process ID (PID) of the current running shell process.

First print the PID of the current shell:

    $ echo $$
    25009

Source the script:

    $ source pid.sh
    25009

Execute the script, note the PID:

    $ ./pid.sh
    25011

Source again:

    $ source pid.sh
    25009

Execute again:

    $ ./pid.sh
    25013

You can see that sourcing the script runs in the same process while executing the script creates a new process every time. That new process is the *new* shell which was created for the execution of the script. Sourcing the script does not create a new shell and thus the PID stays the same.

Summary
-------

**Sourcing** a script will run the commands in the *current* shell process. Changes to the environment take effect in the current shell.

**Executing** a script will run the commands in a *new* shell process. Changes to the environment take effect in the new shell and is lost when the new shell is terminated once the script is done.

Use source if you want the script to change the environment in your currently running shell. Use execute otherwise.

----
See also:

* https://stackoverflow.com/questions/6331075/why-do-you-need-dot-slash-before-script-name-to-run-it-in-bash
* https://askubuntu.com/questions/182012/is-there-a-difference-between-and-source-in-bash-after-all
* https://stackoverflow.com/questions/18351198/what-are-the-uses-of-the-exec-command-in-shell-scripts
