Everybody is over-complicating it with RFCs, IP classes, and such. Simply run a few tests to see how the `ping` command parses the IP input by the user (extraneous chaff removed):

	> ping 1
	Pinging 0.0.0.1 with 32 bytes of data:

	> ping 1.2
	Pinging 1.0.0.2 with 32 bytes of data:

	> ping 1.2.3
	Pinging 1.2.0.3 with 32 bytes of data:

	> ping 1.2.3.4
	Pinging 1.2.3.4 with 32 bytes of data:

	> ping 1.2.3.4.5
	Ping request could not find host 1.2.3.4.5. Please check the name and try again.

	> ping 255
	Pinging 0.0.0.255 with 32 bytes of data:

	> ping 256
	Pinging 0.0.1.0 with 32 bytes of data:

As you can see, the `ping` command (in Windows) allows you to use different IP address formats. An IPv4 address can be broken down into four parts (“dotted-quad”) as so: `A.B.C.D`, and the `ping` command allows you to leave some out, filling in a default of `0` as follows:

    1 part  (ping A)       : 0.0.0.A
    2 parts (ping A.B)     : A.0.0.B
    3 parts (ping A.B.C)   : A.B.0.C
    4 parts (ping A.B.C.D) : A.B.C.D

If you only supply a single part, then if it is under 255 (the maximum for an octet), it is treated like an octet as above, but if it is greater than 255, then it is converted and rolled over into the next field (i.e., `mod 256`).

There are a few edge cases like providing more than four parts doesn’t seem to work (e.g., pinging `google.com`’s IP won’t work for either `0.74.125.226.4` or `74.125.226.4.0`).

You can also use hexadecimal notation in both dotted-quad and flat form, but must format it by pre-pending `0x` to each octet.

<br />
So, there are plenty of ways to represent an (IPv4) IP address. You can use flat or dotted-quad (or dotted-triple, dotted-double, or even dotted-single) format, and for each one, you can use (or even mix and match) decimal, octal, and hexadecimal. For example, you can ping `google.com` in the following ways:

 * `google.com`  (domain name)
 * `74.125.226.4`  (dotted decimal)
 * `1249763844`  (flat decimal)
 * `0112.0175.0342.0004`  (dotted octal)
 * `011237361004`  (flat octal)
 * `0x4A.0x7D.0xE2.0x04`  (dotted hex)
 * `0x4A7DE204`  (flat hex)
 * `74.0175.0xe2.4`  (ಠ_ಠ)

(Thank goodness that binary notation support was not added!)

<br />
**Application**:

In your case, pinging `192.168.072` uses the third format in the above table (`A.B.0.C`), so you are actually pinging `192.168.0.072`. Further, because you have a leading zero on the last part, it is treated as octal, which in decimal is 58.

Mystery solved.

<br />
Note, that while the Windows `ping` command allows for such a wide variety of formats for the input and interprets non-standard formats in the ways seen, that does not necessarily mean that you can use such formats everywhere. Some programs may force you to provide all four parts of a dotted-quad, others may not allow mixing and matching decimal and octal, and so on.

Also, IPv6 addresses further complicate the parsing logic and input format acceptability.

<br />
**Addendum**:

[syss pointed out][1] that if you use an invalid character in one of the numbers (e.g., an `8` or `9` when using octal, a `g` in hex-mode, etc.) then `ping` is smart enough to recognize that and interpret it as a string(-al? -ic?) URL instead of as a numberic IP address.

<sup>(As someone who has had numerous aneurysms and heart-attacks trying to write supposedly “simple” code to accommodate the exponentially exploding number of permutations of data values, I appreciate that it—seems to—correctly process all of the input variations; in this case, at least 3<sup>1</sup>+3<sup>2</sup>+3<sup>3</sup>+3<sup>4</sup>=*120* variations.)</sup>

So, while specifying `010.020.030.040` will ping `8.16.24.32` as expected, passing `010.020.030.080` to `ping` will be treated like a URL instead of an IP address—like `foo.bar.baz.com` which could (but sadly does not) exist. In other words, it tries to ping the subdomain `010` on the subdomain `020` on the domain `030` at the top-level domain `080`. However, since `080` is not a valid TLD (like `.com`, `.net`, and their buddies), the connection fails right at the first step.

The same thing happens with `090.010.010.010` where the invalid character is in a different octet. Likewise, `0xf.0xf.0xf.0xf` pings `15.15.15.15`, but `0xh1.0x1.0xg0.0f` fails.

Oh well, I guess that’s what you get for not being fluent in multiple number-bases.

It’s probably easier and safer to just make sure to always use 4–dotted-quad (“40q”? “quaddy-quad”? “cutie-q”?) addresses.

So go forth and [learn some number bases][2]. You’ll be able to show off at and be the life of parties, and as they say, there are 10 types of people: those who know binary and those who don’t.

<sub>Let’s not even *think* about IPv6 addresses; I think they’re one of the 111 seals!!!</sub>

  [1]: http://blog.superuser.com/2012/10/15/increase-your-ping-fu/#comment-210863
  [2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radix
