WARNING: You **need to store uncommitted edits** to your stash before doing this, using `git stash`. Once complete, you can retrieve the stashed uncommitted edits with `git stash pop`. [git reset hard command will remove all changes!][1]

## Moving to an existing branch
If you want to move your commits to an **existing branch**, it will look like this:

    git checkout existingbranch
    git merge branchToMoveCommitFrom
    git checkout branchToMoveCommitFrom
    git reset --hard HEAD~3 # Go back 3 commits. You *will* lose uncommitted work.
    git checkout existingbranch

## Moving to a new branch

**WARNING:** This method works because you are creating a new branch with the first command: `git branch newbranch`. If you want to move commits to an **existing branch** you need to merge your changes into the existing branch before executing `git reset --hard HEAD~3` (see ***Moving to an existing branch*** above). **If you don't merge your changes first, they will be lost.**

Unless there are other circumstances involved, this can be easily done by branching and rolling back.

<!-- language-all: lang-sh -->

    # Note: Any changes not committed will be lost.
    git branch newbranch      # Create a new branch, saving the desired commits
    git checkout master       # checkout master, this is the place you want to go back
    git reset --hard HEAD~3   # Move master back by 3 commits (Make sure you know how many commits you need to go back)
    git checkout newbranch    # Go to the new branch that still has the desired commits

But do make sure how many commits to go back. Alternatively, you can instead of `HEAD~3`, simply provide the hash of the commit (or the reference like *origin/master*) you want to "revert back to" on the *master* (/current) branch, e.g:

    git reset --hard a1b2c3d4

**Note:** You will **only** be "losing" commits from the master branch, but don't worry, you'll have those commits in newbranch! An easy way to check that, after completing the 4 step sequence of commands above, is by looking at `git log -n4` which will show the history of newbranch actually retained the 3 commits (and the reason is that newbranch was created at the time those changes were already commited on master!). They have only been removed from master, as `git reset` only affected the branch that was checked out at the time of its execution, i.e. master (see [git reset][2] description: *Reset **current** HEAD to the specified state*). `git status` however will not show any checkouts on the newbranch, which might be surprising at first but that is actually expected.

Lastly, [you may need][3] to force push your latest changes to main repo:

    git push origin master --force

**WARNING:** With Git version 2.0 and later, if you later `git rebase` the new branch upon the original (`master`) branch, you may need an explicit `--no-fork-point` option during the rebase to avoid losing the carried-over commits.  Having `branch.autosetuprebase always` set makes this more likely.  See [John Mellor's answer](https://stackoverflow.com/a/36463546/1256452) for details.

  [1]: https://git-scm.com/docs/git-reset#Documentation/git-reset.txt---hard
  [2]: https://git-scm.com/docs/git-reset
  [3]: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/1628563/move-the-most-recent-commits-to-a-new-branch-with-git#comment42808558_6796816
