There are several differences.  In my opinion, a few of the most important are:

 1. `[` is a builtin in Bash and many other modern shells. The builtin `[` is similar to `test` with the additional requirement of a closing `]`. The builtins `[` and `test` imitate the functionality `/bin/[` and `/bin/test` along with their limitations so that scripts would be backwards compatible. The original executables still exist mostly for POSIX compliance and backwards compatibility. Running the command `type [` in Bash indicates that `[` is interpreted as a builtin by default. (Note: `which [` only looks for executables on the *PATH* and is equivalent to `type -P [`. You can execute `type --help` for details)
 2. `[[` is not as compatible, it won&#39;t necessarily work with whatever `/bin/sh` points to.  So `[[` is the more modern Bash / Zsh / Ksh option.
 3. Because `[[` is built into the shell and does not have legacy requirements, you don&#39;t need to worry about word splitting based on the *IFS* variable to mess up on variables that evaluate to a string with spaces.  Therefore, you don&#39;t really need to put the variable in double quotes.

For the most part, the rest is just some nicer syntax.  To see more differences, I recommend this link to an FAQ answer: [What is the difference between test, \[ and \[\[ ?][1].  In fact, if you are serious about bash scripting, I recommend reading the entire [wiki][2], including the FAQ, [Pitfalls][3], and Guide.  [The test section from the guide section][4] explains these differences as well, and why the author(s) think `[[` is a better choice if you don&#39;t need to worry about being as portable.  The main reasons are:

 1. You don&#39;t have to worry about quoting the left-hand side of the test so that it actually gets read as a variable.
 2. You don&#39;t have to escape less than and greater than `&lt; &gt;` with backslashes in order for them not to get evaluated as input redirection, which can really mess some stuff up by overwriting files.  This again goes back to `[[` being a builtin. If [ (test) is an external program the shell would have to make an exception in the way it evaluates `&lt;` and `&gt;` only if `/bin/test` is being called, which wouldn&#39;t really make sense.

  [1]: http://mywiki.wooledge.org/BashFAQ/031
  [2]: http://mywiki.wooledge.org/
  [3]: http://mywiki.wooledge.org/BashPitfalls
  [4]: http://mywiki.wooledge.org/BashGuide/TestsAndConditionals#Conditional_Blocks_.28if.2C_test_and_.5B.5B.29
