# Executive Summary

```
git push -d &lt;remote_name&gt; &lt;branchname&gt;   # Delete remote
git branch -d &lt;branchname&gt;               # Delete local
```

**Note:** In most cases, `&lt;remote_name&gt;` will be `origin`.

# Delete Local Branch

To delete the ***local*** branch, use one of the following:

    git branch -d &lt;branch_name&gt;
    git branch -D &lt;branch_name&gt;

- The `-d` option is an alias for `--delete`, which only deletes the branch if it has already been fully merged in its upstream branch.
- The `-D` option is an alias for `--delete --force`, which deletes the branch &quot;irrespective of its merged status.&quot; [Source: `man git-branch`]
- As of [Git v2.3][git-2.3], `git branch -d` (delete) learned to honor the `-f` (force) flag.
- You will receive an error if you try to delete the currently selected branch.

# Delete Remote Branch

As of [Git v1.7.0][git-1.7.0], you can delete a ***remote*** branch using

    $ git push &lt;remote_name&gt; --delete &lt;branch_name&gt;

which might be easier to remember than

    $ git push &lt;remote_name&gt; :&lt;branch_name&gt;

which was added in [Git v1.5.0][git-1.5.0] &quot;to delete a remote branch or a tag.&quot;

Starting with [Git v2.8.0][git-2.8.0], you can also use `git push` with the `-d` option as an alias for `--delete`. Therefore, the version of Git you have installed will dictate whether you need to use the easier or harder syntax.

## Delete Remote Branch [Original Answer from 5-Jan-2010]

From Chapter 3 of [*Pro Git*][#progit] by Scott Chacon:

&gt; ### Deleting Remote Branches ###
&gt;
&gt; Suppose you’re done with a remote branch — say, you and your collaborators are finished with a feature and have merged it into your remote’s main branch (or whatever branch your stable code-line is in). You can delete a remote branch using the rather obtuse syntax `git push [remotename] :[branch]`. If you want to delete your `serverfix` branch from the server, you run the following:
&gt;
&gt;     $ git push origin :serverfix
&gt;     To git@github.com:schacon/simplegit.git
&gt;      - [deleted]         serverfix
&gt;
&gt; Boom. No more branches on your server. You may want to dog-ear this page, because you’ll need that command, and you’ll likely forget the syntax. A way to remember this command is by recalling the `git push [remotename] [localbranch]:[remotebranch]` syntax that we went over a bit earlier. If you leave off the `[localbranch]` portion, then you’re basically saying, “Take nothing on my side and make it be `[remotebranch]`.”

I ran `git push origin :bugfix`, and it worked beautifully. Scott Chacon was right—I will want to [dog-ear][1] that page (or virtually dog ear-by answering this on Stack Overflow).

# Fetch changes

Finally, execute the following on other machines to propagate changes:

    # Fetch changes from all remotes and locally delete
    # remote deleted branches/tags etc
    # --prune will do the job :-;
    git fetch --all --prune

[1]: http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dogear#Verb

[#progit]: http://git-scm.com/book/en/Git-Branching-Remote-Branches

[git-1.5.0]: https://github.com/gitster/git/blob/master/Documentation/RelNotes/1.5.0.txt

[git-1.7.0]: https://github.com/gitster/git/blob/master/Documentation/RelNotes/1.7.0.txt

[git-2.3]: https://github.com/git/git/blob/master/Documentation/RelNotes/2.3.0.txt

[git-2.8.0]:
https://github.com/git/git/blob/master/Documentation/RelNotes/2.8.0.txt
