***Short Version:** A: & B: are reserved by floppy disk drives, so C: is used by hard drives for backwards compatibility reasons.*

----------

Once upon a time, the early CP/M and IBM PC style computers had no hard drive.  You had one floppy drive, and that was it.  Unless you spent another $1k or so on a second floppy drive, then your system was smokin'!  If you only had one drive it was common to boot from one disk, put in the other disk with your programs and data, then run the program.  Once the program finished, the computer would request that you reinsert the boot disk so you could use the command line again.  Copying data from one disk to the other was a series of

    Please insert source disk into drive A:...
    Please insert destination disk into drive A:...
    Please insert source disk into drive A:...

By the time hard drives became cheap, the "expensive" computers typically had two floppy drives *(one to boot and run common programs, one to save data and run specific programs)*. And so it was common for the motherboard hardware to support two floppy drives at fixed system addresses.  Since it was built into the hardware, it was thought that building the same requirement into the OS was acceptable, and any hard drives added to the machine would start with disk `C:` and so forth.

During the transition from 5.25" disks (which were actually, physically floppy) to 3.5" disks (which were encased in a harder plastic shell) it was common to have both drives in one system, and again it was supported on the motherboard with hardware, and in the OS at fixed addresses.  As very few systems ran out of drive letters, it was not thought to be important to consider making those drives re-assignable in the OS until much later when drives were abstracted along with addresses due to the plug'n'play standard.

A lot of software was developed since that time, and unfortunately much of it expected to see long-term storage on the C: drive.  This includes the BIOS software that boots the computer.  You can still attach two floppy drives, boot into DOS 6.1, and use it as you would have in the early 90's, with floppy drives `A:` and `B:`.

So largely **the reason for starting the hard drive at C is for backwards compatibility**.  While the OS has abstracted data storage to some degree, it still treats `A:` and `B:` differently, in such a way that allows them to be removed from the system without altering the OS, caching them differently, and due to early viruses treating their boot sector with more caution than the hard drive's boot sector.

For Windows specifically, it's worth mentioning that you can use `A:` and `B:` as the names for volumes, be it a flash drive or an internal hard drive.
