If your pile has a sickly sweet smell (not ammonia) it is probably not from a huge overdose of nitrogen. You say that you've added leaves and other material -- so there is some carbon in your pile. My guess is that the composting process has gone anaerobic. In other words, you've got the wrong batch of bacteria working on breaking down the pile. Anaerobic breakdown will be very slow and give off this kind of smell.

You can get the right batch of bacteria (aerobic) working on breaking down the pile by allowing air to penetrate the pile. Right now your pile is so big that the center is not getting any air and these bacteria can't go to work.

Some bits of advice:

* Keep your piles to about 1.0-1.5m cubed; this is an ideal size for a compost pile. It is easier to work with, but large enough to get the aerobic bacteria working. Alternatively, you can make a windrow of about that size but as long as you want. When you're composting this way, the pile with shrink a lot as it breaks down -- you don't have to worry about a mile long row of compost.
* To introduce air and make your piles more manageable, you can: Take your existing pile and break it into about a half dozen piles, thoroughly mixing it as you go. Or try poking a long pole (as thick as you can find and are able to insert) into the pile to introduce air into the center. Your pile is big enough that the latter solution may not work well.
* If you break your existing pile into separate piles, and you have some carbon-containing materials that you can add, it might be a good idea. Carbon is hard to come by this time of year (no leaves, etc but you may be able to get hold of some spoiled hay that you can mix in) so if you don't have anything just adding air might work.
* As you're adding material, if you can make a layer of hay or straw every 10-20cm or so, you'll allow air to naturally move into the pile. If you don't mind keeping a bale or two of straw handy, I would just add a layer of 2-3 flakes of straw, and then dump the clippings on top of that. This will prevent it from getting too wet and matted down, and at the same time help to balance your carbon to nitrogen ratio.
* If you can't or won't keep hay/straw on hand, you can add carbon to the compost pile by keeping a pile (or barrel, or bags) of wood chips or sawdust near the compost pile. Add the chips/sawdust as described above for hay -- about a 0.5-1.0" layer of wood to a 4-6" layer of grass (experiment to find out what works best with your materials).
  * Avoid charcoal briquettes because they take a long time to break down (you need more surface area) and they can have additives that will make your compost toxic to plants.
  * Avoid wood ash because it will raise the pH of the pile too much and put the wrong microbes in control.
* You can make a big pile of autumn leaves this year right next to your grass compost pile. If you can keep it dry they will be easier to use next summer, but even wet, matted leaves will do the job. This is another good carbon source you can use as described above to balance the ratio.
* If you have topsoil or mature compost *that have not been sterilized* you can add to the pile as you build it, this will inoculate the pile with all sorts of bacteria and other organisms that will help it break down faster. A thin sprinkling (0.25") of soil on top of every 6-12" layer should do the trick.
* You probably should not add any "compost accelerator" products. These contain bacterial and fungal ingredients as described above for soil/mature compost. They also usually contain nitrogen, which is the last thing you need to add to your pile -- you've got a nitrogen overdose.

The pile should heat up and break down faster when you introduce air and balance the carbon-to-nitrogen ratio.

If you have no interest in managing your pile:

* If you don't mind the current smell, you can let it sit the way it is indefinitely. It will rot over time.
* Check out your [town's recycling guide](http://www.bow-nh.com/Trash-AZRecycling.htm) under "Compost Materials". It includes the number of a local landscaping company who will presumably take your compostables.

If we were just a little closer (I'm about an hour away from you) I'd offer to come and take it off your hands. 10+ cu meters of raw compost sounds like a dream but I'd be trucking back and forth all day :)
