Undoing a commit is a little scary if you don&#39;t know how it works.  But it&#39;s actually amazingly easy if you do understand. I&#39;ll show you the 4 different ways you can undo a commit.

Say you have this, where C is your HEAD and (F) is the state of your files.

       (F)
    A-B-C
        ↑
      master

### Option 1: `git reset --hard`

You want to **destroy commit C and also throw away any uncommitted changes**.  You do this:

    git reset --hard HEAD~1

The result is:

     (F)
    A-B
      ↑
    master

Now B is the HEAD.  Because you used `--hard`, your files are reset to their state at commit B.

### Option 2: `git reset`

Maybe commit C wasn&#39;t a disaster, but just a bit off.  You want to **undo the commit but keep your changes** for a bit of editing before you do a better commit.  Starting again from here, with C as your HEAD:

       (F)
    A-B-C
        ↑
      master

Do this, leaving off the `--hard`:

    git reset HEAD~1

In this case the result is:

       (F)
    A-B-C
      ↑
    master

In both cases, HEAD is just a pointer to the latest commit.  When you do a `git reset HEAD~1`, you tell Git to move the HEAD pointer back one commit.  But (unless you use `--hard`) you leave your files as they were.  So now `git status` shows the changes you had checked into C.  You haven&#39;t lost a thing!

### Option 3: `git reset --soft`

For the lightest touch, you can even **undo your commit but leave your files and your [index](https://git.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/WhatIsTheIndex)**:

    git reset --soft HEAD~1

This not only leaves your files alone, it even leaves your *index* alone.  When you do `git status`, you&#39;ll see that the same files are in the index as before.  In fact, right after this command, you could do `git commit` and you&#39;d be redoing the same commit you just had.

### Option 4: you did `git reset --hard` and need to get that code back

One more thing: Suppose you **destroy a commit** as in the first example, **but then discover you needed it after all**?  Tough luck, right?

Nope, there&#39;s *still* a way to get it back.  Type this

    git reflog

and you&#39;ll see a list of (partial) commit [SHAs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SHA-1#Data_integrity) (that is, hashes) that you&#39;ve moved around in.  Find the commit you destroyed, and do this:

    git checkout -b someNewBranchName shaYouDestroyed

You&#39;ve now resurrected that commit.  Commits don&#39;t actually get destroyed in Git for some 90 days, so you can usually go back and rescue one you didn&#39;t mean to get rid of.
