Yes, it was [added][1] in version 2.5. The expression syntax is:
```python
a if condition else b
```
First `condition` is evaluated, then exactly one of either `a` or `b` is evaluated and returned based on the [Boolean][2] value of `condition`. If `condition` evaluates to `True`, then `a` is evaluated and returned but `b` is ignored, or else when `b` is evaluated and returned but `a` is ignored.

This allows short-circuiting because when `condition` is true only `a` is evaluated and `b` is not evaluated at all, but when `condition` is false only `b` is evaluated and `a` is not evaluated at all.

For example:
```python
>>> 'true' if True else 'false'
'true'
>>> 'true' if False else 'false'
'false'
```
Note that conditionals are an _expression_, not a _statement_. This means you can't use **statements** such as `pass`, or assignments with `=` (or "augmented" assignments like `+=`), within a conditional **expression**:
```python
>>> pass if False else pass
  File "<stdin>", line 1
    pass if False else pass
         ^
SyntaxError: invalid syntax

>>> # Python parses this as `x = (1 if False else y) = 2`
>>> # The `(1 if False else x)` part is actually valid, but
>>> # it can't be on the left-hand side of `=`.
>>> x = 1 if False else y = 2
  File "<stdin>", line 1
SyntaxError: cannot assign to conditional expression

>>> # If we parenthesize it instead...
>>> (x = 1) if False else (y = 2)
  File "<stdin>", line 1
    (x = 1) if False else (y = 2)
       ^
SyntaxError: invalid syntax
```
(In 3.8 and above, the `:=` "walrus" operator allows simple assignment of values *as an expression*, which is then compatible with this syntax. But please don't write code like that; it will quickly become very difficult to understand.)

Similarly, because it is an expression, the `else` part is *mandatory*:
```
# Invalid syntax: we didn't specify what the value should be if the
# condition isn't met. It doesn't matter if we can verify that
# ahead of time.
a if True
```
You can, however, use conditional expressions to assign a variable like so:
```python
x = a if True else b
```
Or for example to return a value:
```
# Of course we should just use the standard library `max`;
# this is just for demonstration purposes.
def my_max(a, b):
    return a if a > b else b
```
Think of the conditional expression as switching between two values. We can use it when we are in a 'one value or another' situation, where we will *do the same thing* with the result, regardless of whether the condition is met. We use the expression to compute the value, and then do something with it. If you need to *do something different* depending on the condition, then use a normal `if` **statement** instead.

----------

Keep in mind that it's frowned upon by some Pythonistas for several reasons:

- The order of the arguments is different from those of the classic `condition ? a : b` ternary operator from many other languages (such as [C][3], [C++][4], [Go][5], [Perl][6], [Ruby][7], [Java][8], [JavaScript][9], etc.), which may lead to bugs when people unfamiliar with Python's "surprising" behaviour use it (they may reverse the argument order).
- Some find it "unwieldy", since it goes contrary to the normal flow of thought (thinking of the condition first and then the effects).
- Stylistic reasons. (Although the 'inline `if`' can be *really* useful, and make your script more concise, it really does complicate your code)

If you're having trouble remembering the order, then remember that when read aloud, you (almost) say what you mean. For example, `x = 4 if b > 8 else 9` is read aloud as `x will be 4 if b is greater than 8 otherwise 9`.

Official documentation:

- [Conditional expressions][10]
- [Is there an equivalent of C’s ”?:” ternary operator?][11]

  [1]: https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2005-September/056846.html "[Python-Dev] Conditional Expression Resolution"
  [2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_data_type "Boolean data type"
  [3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C_%28programming_language%29
  [4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C%2B%2B
  [5]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Go_%28programming_language%29
  [6]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perl
  [7]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ruby_%28programming_language%29
  [8]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_%28programming_language%29
  [9]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JavaScript
  [10]: https://docs.python.org/3/reference/expressions.html#conditional-expressions "Conditional expressions"
  [11]: https://docs.python.org/3/faq/programming.html#is-there-an-equivalent-of-c-s-ternary-operator "Is there an equivalent of C’s ”?:” ternary operator?"
