# Wikipedia:Wikipedia Signpost/2021-09-26/Op-Ed

I am one of the administrators desysopped on the Chinese Wikipedia on
13 September 2021 by the WMF Office account.

First, I would like to introduce myself. I come from mainland China
and have been living abroad for several years. I only write articles,
anti-vandalism, patrol new articles on Wikipedia. I never edit the
disputed articles and never edit warred with others. I am a
hardworking Wikipedian. I think these are the reasons why dozens of
users supported me to become a sysop a few years ago.

I also care about Wikipedia's community development. I have joined two
Wikipedia introductory meetups in China. As I have long lived abroad
so I attended a few Wikipedia meetings where I live. At the same time,
I also help new users in the Chinese community. It doesn’t matter
which community I work with. And I have to say, the community or user
group are not political parties. Anyone may join or leave without
disclosing their political views.

I was shocked on 13 September by the WMF Office action which
desysopped me and other admins, and banned 7 other editors. I don’t
know what my guilt is. When another sysop sent an email to
ca@wikimedia.org to ask for details, the WMF replied that they don’t
want to explain the reason now, and won’t accept an appeal. So the
sentence "Questions can be directed to ca@wikimedia.org" in the log is
just dark humour. When Maggie Dennis published her statement on Meta
she said, her statement contained  "ambiguity". "The security risk
relates to information about infiltration of Wikimedia systems,
including positions with access to personally identifiable information
and elected bodies of influence", Dennis claimed. I really don’t
understand how a sysop can influence personal security. We are not
CheckUsers. The BBC published a report saying "Wikipedia blames
pro-China infiltration for bans". Does that mean the WMF Office action
has a political purpose? So our articles about Chinese history,
culture, ancient architecture, are a type of "infiltration". That’s
ridiculous.

I am extremely disappointed with the WMF now. Sysops on the Chinese
Wikipedia who do the most work, got the most scolding, and finally
were desysopped and even banned by the WMF Office. This terrible
action is unprecedented and unbelievable. I won’t trust WMF anymore,
today they desysopped me, tomorrow they may globally ban me as well.

I’d like to return to my off-Wiki life now and don’t want to attract attention.

What do other mainland Chinese think about the bans? We're a diverse
group, so there may be many opinions. But there is a very long
published open letter from WMC [ Wikimedians of Mainland China – ed. ]. I'll summarize what I consider to be
the most important parts that I most agree with.

Many people may know, Wikipedia cannot be accessed normally in
Mainland China. So when I first accessed Wikipedia via a VPN, I
worried about it. But nothing happened. No Wikipedian I know has been
admonished by the Chinese government. And the government never
declared our meetings illegal. The government must know that we are
just a group of volunteers who contribute knowledge. WMF banned 7
users and desysopped 12 administrators in an office action, WMF has
accomplished something that the Chinese government didn’t manage to
do. We try to enable more people to participate in editing in
Wikipedia, we built mirror sites, we created tutorials, we develop
communities. The Foundation has never shown compassion or support for
us. Now we have to believe WMF wants to abandon China, they don’t care
about us. I had free pizza because WMF pays for communities outside
China, but when I was in China, everyone paid for their own food. When
we were developing the community, we spent everything out of our own
pocket, the WMF paid nothing, from VPN to coffee. But we were still
happy because we weren’t here for politics, we were here to write
actual articles and have fun. China has ⅕ of the world’s population,
WMF’s budget was 100 million dollars a year, but WMF spent nothing and
cared nothing about us. They were willing to pay for mobile data for
Wikimania attendees, but not VPN for us.

They found a nonsense excuse, "canvassing", to take action against us.
In their eyes, it’s only democratic when the vote goes their way; when
a candidate they dislike won the election, they want to "stop the
steal." These sysops either are good at writing articles, or good at
anti-vandalism. They do practical things, they don’t gossip in the
village pump. WMF never asked us for information before the bans, why
do they trust the informer, how do they determine that this is not
framed? Most admins who were desysopped had their RFAs years ago. How
could these RFAs be fine for years, while the WMF just now announce
that they were rigged?

WMF banned or desysopped 14 admins, this takes up one-third of all
active admins on zh.Wiki. Does WMF insist that a third of all admins
who were recently active on zh.Wiki were all "infiltrated" by the
Chinese government? This is a crazy view. The most active admin on
zh.wiki was banned. Four of the top 10 admins were either banned or
desysopped. This is ridiculous and they don’t care if there will be
maintenance work backlogs or vandalizers and long-term abusers
celebrating one-third of all admins are suddenly gone.

This leaves a huge gap for maintenance work on zh.Wiki, since a third
of all admins are absent now. Because newbies from mainland China use
VPNs to edit and suffered IP blocks because Wikimedia’s policy to block proxies , they have to apply for IPBE (IP block exemption) to edit and they can’t register a new
account on their own, they have to write an email to an admin to have
them register an account for the newbies. However, I have heard from
newbies that many of them haven’t heard back from the admins for
weeks, because the admins who were working on registering new accounts
and assigning IPBE for newbies were desysopped, too. Unless you think
all mainland Chinese editors are "infiltrators", this disproportionate
office action hurts the mainland users.

Maggie Dennis has no vision for developing Wikipedia in China. She
mentioned nothing for future community development, saying she wanted
to connect to the "international Chinese community". Other WMC members
also share their emails with WMF and AffCom to me, and they often
complained to me that WMF and AffCom rarely write back, and a reply
usually takes more than a week. WMF and AffCom never contacted us
asking if we need any help considering Wikipedia’s blockade in China
or if we had any trouble with the government, and they only contact us
when something very bad happened.

There is also a bug that only happens when someone is editing on VPN.
This bug logs out the person’s account whenever they click the “save
changes” button, so they can’t save any changes unless they change
their device. Mainland Chinese admins had reported this bug to Phabricator over a year ago, but WMF still hasn't fixed it [ Phabricator:T244635 – ed. ]. IPBE and
the bug are burdens that WMF can solve from their side, and it can
improve mainland Chinese’s editing experience, but they still refuse
to do them.

After this office action, there will be almost no pro-Beijing or
okay-with-Beijing admins and bureaucrats on zh.Wiki. Its neutrality is
going to suffer a huge hit, because the balance between the mainland,
Hong Kong and Taiwan admins are broken. WMF didn't consider that the
people who gossip to them had a political motivation to attack
pro-Beijing and okay-with Beijing admins. WMF is calling a normal
political view "infiltration" and voting blocs as "vote canvassing".

I know it was the Chinese government who blocked Wikipedia in China
and I should express my dissatisfaction to them. But I think many of
the points I made are irrelevant to the Chinese government. They
didn’t send police to disturb our meetings, didn’t arrest anyone
(anti-Beijing editors included), and VPN is cheap and convenient to
use. However, WMF didn’t help us with money, didn’t fix bugs, didn’t
improve the MediaWiki system, didn’t reply to our emails, didn’t ask
if we are okay after Wikipedia was blocked, and they finally banned us
and desysopped us. That is why I am angry with the WMF.

News and notes

In the media

Opinion

Op-Ed

Disinformation report

Discussion report

Recent research

Community view

Traffic report

News from Diff

WikiProject report
